feat(lep): upgrade path enforcement (#5583)
longhorn/longhorn: enhancements/20230315-upgrade-path-enforcement.md

# Upgrade Path Enforcement

## Summary

Currently, Longhorn does not enforce the upgrade path, even though we claim Longhorn only supports upgrading from the previous stable release, for example, upgrading to 1.5.x is only supported from 1.4.x or 1.5.0.

> Without upgrade enforcement, it allows users to upgrade from any previous version to a later version and it will cause deprecated features to be unable to remove from the later version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Without upgrade enforcement, we will allow users to upgrade from any previous version. This will cause extra testing efforts to cover all upgrade paths. Additionally, the goal of this enhancement is to support rollback after upgrade failure and prevent downgrades.
```

Author: Modified. Thanks

### Related Issues

https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/5131

## Motivation

### Goals

> - Enforce the upgrade path to disallow users to upgrade from an unsupported source version. After rejecting the user upgrade, the user longhorn setup should be intact w/o any impacts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Enforce an upgrade path to prevent users from upgrading from any unsupported version. After rejecting the user's upgrade attempt, the user's Longhorn setup should remain intact without any impacts.
```

Author: Modified. Thanks

- It also does not allow users to do the downgrade.

### Non-goals

- CRDs update will not be blocked and users must have a rollback manually.

> - New components added in new version will not be removed automatically when users return to original version.

Author: Modified. Changed to `Automatic rollback if the upgrade failed` for `Non-goals`

## Proposal

- When upgrading with `kubectl`, it will check the upgrade path at entry point of the pods for `longhorn-manager`, `longhorn-admission-webhook`, `longhorn-conversion-webhook` and `longhorn-recovery-backend`.

> - When upgrading with `Helm` or as a `Rancher Catalog App`, it will check the upgrade path by a `pre-upgrade`job of `Helm hook`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When upgrading with `Helm` or as a `Rancher App Marketplace`, it will check the upgrade path by a `pre-upgrade`job of `Helm hook`.
```

Author: Modified. Thanks

### User Stories

> - Users only can upgrade Longhorn from previous stable version such as 1.4.1 to 1.5.x or 1.5.0 to 1.5.x. by `kubectl`, `Helm` or `Rancher Catalog App`.
> - Users can not downgrade Longhorn to any version even from 1.5.1 to 1.5.0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- As the admin, I want to upgrade Longhorn from x.y.* or x.(y+1).0 to x.(y+1).* by `kubectl`, `Helm` or `Rancher App Marketplace`, so that the upgrade should succeed. 
- As the admin, I want to upgrade Longhorn from the previous authorized versions to a new major/minor version by `kubectl`, `Helm`, or `Rancher App Marketplace`, so that the upgrade should succeed. 
- As the admin, I want to upgrade Longhorn from x.(y-1).* to x.(y+1).* by `kubectl`, `Helm` or `Rancher App Marketplace`, so that the upgrade should fail.
- As the admin, I want to roll back Longhorn from the failed upgrade to the previous install by `kubectl`, `Helm`, or `Rancher App Marketplace`, so that the upgrade should succeed. 
 - As the admin, I want to downgrade Longhorn to any lower version by `kubectl`, `Helm`, or `Rancher App Marketplace`, so that the upgrade should fail.
```

Reviewer: @longhorn/dev for user stories, you can simply use user story format. `As a [persona], I [want to], [so that].`

Author: Modified. Thanks

> ### User Experience In Detail

Reviewer: Please update as per the user stories I suggested.

Author: Updated. Thanks

1. It will be allowed and Longhorn will be upgraded successfully.

##### Upgrade With `Helm` Failed

1. Install Longhorn 1.4.1 with Helm following [Longhorn Install with Helm document](https://longhorn.io/docs/1.4.1/deploy/install/install-with-helm/) or install Longhorn 1.4.1 as a Rancher Apps following [Longhorn Install as a Rancher Apps & Marketplace document](https://longhorn.io/docs/1.4.1/deploy/install/install-with-rancher/)
1. Upgrade to Longhorn 1.5.x with Helm following [Longhorn Install with Helm document](https://longhorn.io/docs/1.4.1/deploy/upgrade/longhorn-manager/#upgrade-with-helm) or upgrade to Longhorn 1.5.x as a Rancher Catalog App following [Longhorn Upgrade as a Rancher Apps & Marketplace document](https://longhorn.io/docs/1.4.1/deploy/upgrade/longhorn-manager/#upgrade-as-a-rancher-catalog-app)
1. It will not be allowed and a `pre-upgrade`job of `Helm hook` failed makes the whole helm upgrading process failed.
1. Components of old version will still work normally.

> 1. Users need to recover Longhorn with `Helm` by using commands:

Reviewer: These two seem identical, so please ensure the steps are correct and different. Also, suggest updating them based on the user stories I suggest.

Author: Updated in new user stories. Thanks

    ```shell
    helm rollback longhorn
    ```

    or

    ```shell
    helm upgrade longhorn longhorn/longhorn --namespace longhorn-system --version 1.4.1
    ```

1. Users need to recover Longhorn with `Rancher Apps` by upgrading the original Longhorn 1.4.1 on `Rancher Catalog App` again.

### API changes

`None`

## Design

### Implementation Overview

#### Blocking Upgrade With `kubectl`

Check the upgrade path is supported or not at entry point of the `longhorn-manager`, `longhorn-admission-webhook`, `longhorn-conversion-webhook` and `longhorn-recovery-backend`

1. Get Longhorn current version `currentVersion` by the function `GetCurrentLonghornVersion`
1. Get Longhorn upgrading version `upgradeVersion` from `meta.Version`

> 1. Compare `currentVersion` and `upgradeVersion` and only allow upgrading to next stable version.

Reviewer 2: Does this mean that a cross-minor-version upgrade is not allowed?

Author: Did You mean `v1.5.0 to 1.5.2` as `v1.5.0 to 1.5.x`? It should be allowed.

Author: Added `cross-minor-version` is allowed. Thanks

Reviewer 2: IIRC:
v1.5.x is a patch version
v1.x.0 is a minor version

Author: v1.4.x to v1.5.x is allowed, v1.4.x is previous stable version,
v1.3.x to v1.5.x is not allowed, v1.3.x is not.

|  currentVersion |  upgradeVersion |  Allow |
|   :-:    |   :-:      |   :-:  |
|  v1.4.x  |  1.5.x     |  ✓     |
|  v1.5.0  |  1.5.x     |  ✓     |
|  v1.3.x  |  1.5.x     |  X     |
|  v1.2.x  |  1.5.x     |  X     |
|  v1.5.x  |  1.4.x     |  X     |
|  v1.5.1  |  1.5.0     |  X     |

1. Downgrade is not allowed.

> 1. When the upgrade path is not supported, new created pods of the `longhorn-manager`, `longhorn-admission-webhook`, `longhorn-conversion-webhook` and `longhorn-recovery-backend` will keep returning errors and show logs for the upgrade path is not supported.

Reviewer 2: NIT: Need to broadcast events as well.

```txt
apiVersion: batch/v1
kind: Job
metadata:
  annotations:
    "helm.sh/hook": pre-upgrade
    "helm.sh/hook-delete-policy": hook-succeeded,before-hook-creation,hook-failed
  name: longhorn-pre-upgrade
  ...
spec:
  ...
  template:
    metadata:
      name: longhorn-pre-upgrade
      ...
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: longhorn-post-upgrade
        ...
        command:
        - longhorn-manager
        - pre-upgrade
        env:
        ...
```

1. When upgrading starts, the `pre-upgrade` job will start to run firstly and it will be failed if the upgrade path is not supported then `Helm` upgrading process will be failed.

### Test plan

#### Test Supported Upgrade Path

1. Install Longhorn v1.4.x.
1. Wait for all pods ready.
1. Create a Volume and write some data.
1. Upgrade to Longhorn v1.5.0.
1. Wait for all pods upgraded successfully.
1. Check if data is not corrupted.

#### Test Unsupported Upgrade Path

1. Install Longhorn v1.3.x.
1. Wait for all pods ready.
1. Create a Volume and write some data.
1. Upgrade to Longhorn v1.5.0.
1. Upgrading process will be stuck or failed.
1. Check if data is not corrupted.
1. Rollback to Longhorn v1.3.x with the same setting.

> 1. Longhorn v1.3.x will work normally.

Reviewer 2: Will we have an official doc mentioning how to roll back to the previous version after the upgrade failure? I mean, which components users need to remove.

Author: I think it depends on what components we added in the new version for example in 1.5.0 will have `recovery_backend` and not in 1.3.x.
Yes, we should have somewhere to record what new components we added compared with the previous version.

Reviewer: This should be recorded in the error message to let users notice that.

Author: Added. logs or event should include the components removed manually when rolling back to the previous version.
There is a question: how do we know what components were added between two versions (maybe 1.2.x to 1.5.x)?

Reviewer 2: Recording the components that need to be removed in the error message is a good idea!

### Related Issues

https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/5131

## Motivation

### Goals

- Enforce an upgrade path to prevent users from upgrading from any unsupported version. After rejecting the user's upgrade attempt, the user's Longhorn setup should remain intact without any impacts.

### Non-goals

- Automatic rollback if the upgrade failed.

## Proposal

- When upgrading with `kubectl`, it will check the upgrade path at entry point of the pods for `longhorn-manager`, `longhorn-admission-webhook`, `longhorn-conversion-webhook` and `longhorn-recovery-backend`.
- When upgrading with `Helm` or as a `Rancher App Marketplace`, it will check the upgrade path by a `pre-upgrade` job of `Helm hook`

### User Stories

- As the admin, I want to upgrade Longhorn from x.y.* or x.(y+1).0 to x.(y+1).* by `kubectl`, `Helm` or `Rancher App Marketplace`, so that the upgrade should succeed.
- As the admin, I want to upgrade Longhorn from the previous authorized versions to a new major/minor version by `kubectl`, `Helm`, or `Rancher App Marketplace`, so that the upgrade should succeed.

> - As the admin, I want to upgrade Longhorn from x.(y-1).* to x.(y+1).* by `kubectl`, `Helm` or `Rancher App Marketplace`, so that the upgrade should fail.

Reviewer: Change to

> - As the admin, I want to upgrade Longhorn from x.(y-1).* to x.(y+1).* by "kubectl`, `Helm` or `Rancher App Marketplace`, so that the upgrade should be prevented and the system with the current version continues running w/o any interruptions`.

Author: Modified. Thanks

> - As the admin, I want to roll back Longhorn from the failed upgrade to the previous install by `kubectl`, `Helm`, or `Rancher App Marketplace`, so that the upgrade should succeed.

Reviewer: Change to (please need to review the suggestion or even fix if the wording is incorrect before applying it)

> - As the admin, I want to roll back Longhorn from the failed upgrade to the previous install by `kubectl`, `Helm`, or `Rancher App Marketplace`, so that the rollback should succeed.

Author: Modified. Thanks

> - As the admin, I want to downgrade Longhorn to any lower version by `kubectl`, `Helm`, or `Rancher App Marketplace`, so that the upgrade should fail.

Reviewer: Change to

> - As the admin, I want to downgrade Longhorn to any lower version by `kubectl`, `Helm`, or `Rancher App Marketplace`, so that the downgrade should be prevented and the system with the current version continues running w/o any interruptions.

Author: Modified. Thanks

   ```

1. After Longhorn works normally, upgrade Longhorn by using this command:

    ```shell
    kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/longhorn/longhorn/vx.(y+1).*/deploy/longhorn.yaml
    ```

1. It will be allowed and Longhorn will be upgraded successfully.

##### Upgrade With `Helm` Or `Rancher App Marketplace`

1. Install Longhorn x.y.* or x.(y+1).0 with Helm as [Longhorn Install with Helm document](https://longhorn.io/docs/1.4.1/deploy/install/install-with-helm/) or install Longhorn x.y.* or x.(y+1).0 with a Rancher Apps as [Longhorn Install as a Rancher Apps & Marketplace document](https://longhorn.io/docs/1.4.1/deploy/install/install-with-rancher/)
1. Upgrade to Longhorn x.(y+1).* with Helm as [Longhorn Upgrade with Helm document](https://longhorn.io/docs/1.4.1/deploy/upgrade/longhorn-manager/#upgrade-with-helm) or upgrade to Longhorn x.(y+1).* with a Rancher Catalog App as [Longhorn Upgrade as a Rancher Apps & Marketplace document](https://longhorn.io/docs/1.4.1/deploy/upgrade/longhorn-manager/#upgrade-as-a-rancher-catalog-app)
1. It will be allowed and Longhorn will be upgraded successfully.

> #### Upgrade Longhorn From The Previous Authorized Versions To A New Major Version

Reviewer: The wording can be improved like.

`Upgrade Longhorn From the authorized versions to a major release version`. This can be a goal as well, so you can add this to the goals.

> - As the admin, I want to upgrade Longhorn from an authorized version or x.y.* to (x+1).0.* by `kubectl`, `Helm` or `Rancher App Marketplace`, so that the upgrade should succeed.

Author: Modified. Thanks

##### Upgrade With `kubectl`

1. Install Longhorn on any Kubernetes cluster by using this command:

   ```shell
   kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/longhorn/longhorn/vx.y.*/deploy/longhorn.yaml
   ```

1. After Longhorn works normally, upgrade Longhorn by using this command:

    ```shell

>     kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/longhorn/longhorn/v(x+1).y.*/deploy/longhorn.yaml

Reviewer: Change to

`kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/longhorn/longhorn/v(x+1).0.*/deploy/longhorn.yaml`

since x.(y+1).* can be only upgraded from x.y.*.

Author: Modified. Thanks

    ```

1. It will be allowed and Longhorn will be upgraded successfully.

> ##### Upgrade With `Helm` Or `Rancher App Marketplace`

Reviewer: Update below steps accordingly based on my above comments.

Author: Modified. Thanks

    ```

1. After Longhorn works normally, upgrade Longhorn by using this command:

    ```shell
    kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/longhorn/longhorn/vx.(y+1).*/deploy/longhorn.yaml
    ```

1. It will be not allowed and Longhorn will block the upgrade for `longhorn-manager`, `longhorn-admission-webhook`, `longhorn-conversion-webhook` and `longhorn-recovery-backend`.

##### Upgrade With `Helm` Or `Rancher App Marketplace`

1. Install Longhorn x.(y-1).* with Helm as [Longhorn Install with Helm document](https://longhorn.io/docs/1.4.1/deploy/install/install-with-helm/) or install Longhorn x.(y-1).* with a Rancher Apps as [Longhorn Install as a Rancher Apps & Marketplace document](https://longhorn.io/docs/1.4.1/deploy/install/install-with-rancher/)
1. Upgrade to Longhorn x.(y+1).* with Helm as [Longhorn Upgrade with Helm document](https://longhorn.io/docs/1.4.1/deploy/upgrade/longhorn-manager/#upgrade-with-helm) or upgrade to Longhorn x.(y+1).* with a Rancher Catalog App as [Longhorn Upgrade as a Rancher Apps & Marketplace document](https://longhorn.io/docs/1.4.1/deploy/upgrade/longhorn-manager/#upgrade-as-a-rancher-catalog-app)

> 1. It will not be allowed and a `pre-upgrade`job of `Helm hook` failed makes the whole helm upgrading process failed.

Reviewer: After this failed, do users need to do anything? or the system just intact and continues serving?

Author: Add descriptions for `kubectl` which needs to do rollback and `Helm` and `Rancher App Marketplace` should be intact and continues serving

Author: Added descriptions for `kubectl` which needs to do rollback manually to restart `longhorn-manager` and `Helm` and `Rancher Catalog App` should be intact and continues serving

#### Roll Back Longhorn From The Failed Upgrade To The Previous Install

##### Roll Back With `kubectl`

1. Users need to recover Longhorn by using this command again:

   ```shell
   kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/longhorn/longhorn/[previous installed version]/deploy/longhorn.yaml
   ```

1. Longhorn will be rolled back successfully.

> 1. And users might need to delete new components introduced by new version Longhorn manually.

Reviewer: Please describe the exact example here about what componentes users need to delete.

Author: Added a section below to give an example about what components users need to delete

##### Roll Back With `Helm` Or `Rancher App Marketplace`

1. Users need to recover Longhorn with `Helm` by using commands:

    ```shell

>     helm rollback longhorn

Reviewer: Probably need to briefly describe which version users need to rollback.

>Usage:
helm rollback <RELEASE> [REVISION] [flags]

Author: Add `helm history longhorn` to check REVISION of the previous installed Longhorn.

    ```
    or
    ```shell
    helm upgrade longhorn longhorn/longhorn --namespace longhorn-system --version [previous installed version]
    ```

> 1. Users need to recover Longhorn with `Rancher Catalog Apps` by upgrading the previous installed Longhorn version at `Rancher App Marketplace` again.

Reviewer: `Rancher App Marketplace`

So if in this case, users don't need to run `helm rollback`?

Author: It would be like `helm upgrade longhorn longhorn/longhorn --namespace longhorn-system --version [previous installed version]` when users upgrade Longhorn again at `Rancher App Marketplace`.

1. Longhorn will be rolled back successfully.

#### Downgrade Longhorn To Any Lower Version

##### Downgrade With `kubectl`

1. Install Longhorn on any Kubernetes cluster by using this command:

    ```shell
    kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/longhorn/longhorn/vx.y.*/deploy/longhorn.yaml
    ```

1. After Longhorn works normally, upgrade Longhorn by using this command:

    ```shell
    kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/longhorn/longhorn/vx.(y-z).*/deploy/longhorn.yaml
    ```

> 1. It will be not allowed and Longhorn will block the upgrade for `longhorn-manager`, `longhorn-admission-webhook`, `longhorn-conversion-webhook` and `longhorn-recovery-backend`.

Reviewer: Do users need to do some clean up later on like wrong upgrade mentioned above?

Author: Usually we add new components only when upgrading the system, did we have components removed before?

1. Upgrade to Longhorn (x-z).y.* or x.(y-z).* with Helm as [Longhorn Upgrade with Helm document](https://longhorn.io/docs/1.4.1/deploy/upgrade/longhorn-manager/#upgrade-with-helm) or upgrade to Longhorn (x-z).y.* or x.(y-z).* with a Rancher Catalog App as [Longhorn Upgrade as a Rancher Apps & Marketplace document](https://longhorn.io/docs/1.4.1/deploy/upgrade/longhorn-manager/#upgrade-as-a-rancher-catalog-app)
1. It will not be allowed and a `pre-upgrade`job of `Helm hook` failed makes the whole helm upgrading process failed.

### API changes

`None`

## Design

### Implementation Overview

#### Blocking Upgrade With `kubectl`

Check the upgrade path is supported or not at entry point of the `longhorn-manager`, `longhorn-admission-webhook`, `longhorn-conversion-webhook` and `longhorn-recovery-backend`

1. Get Longhorn current version `currentVersion` by the function `GetCurrentLonghornVersion`
1. Get Longhorn upgrading version `upgradeVersion` from `meta.Version`

> 1. Compare `currentVersion` and `upgradeVersion` and only allow next one major/minor or cross-patch version upgrade (e.g., 1.3.x to 1.5.x is not allowed) as following table.

Reviewer: Change to

> Compare `currentVersion` and `upgradeVersion`, only allow authorized version upgrade (e.g., 1.3.x to 1.5.x is not allowed) as following table.

Author: Modified. Thanks

1. Longhorn is intact and continues serving.

#### Roll Back Longhorn From The Failed Upgrade To The Previous Install

##### Roll Back With `kubectl`

1. Users need to recover Longhorn by using this command again:

   ```shell
   kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/longhorn/longhorn/[previous installed version]/deploy/longhorn.yaml
   ```

1. Longhorn will be rolled back successfully.
1. And users might need to delete new components introduced by new version Longhorn manually.

##### Roll Back With `Helm` Or `Rancher App Marketplace`

1. Users need to recover Longhorn with `Helm` by using commands:

    ```shell
    helm history longhorn # to get previous installed Longhorn REVISION
    helm rollback longhorn [REVISION]
    ```
    or
    ```shell
    helm upgrade longhorn longhorn/longhorn --namespace longhorn-system --version [previous installed version]
    ```

1. Users need to recover Longhorn with `Rancher Catalog Apps` by upgrading the previous installed Longhorn version at `Rancher App Marketplace` again.
1. Longhorn will be rolled back successfully.

##### Manually Cleanup Example

> When users try to upgrade Longhorn from v1.3.x to v1.5.x, a new deployment `longhorn-recovery-backend` will be introduced and the upgrade will fail.

Reviewer: Ok, so it's about if there are new components introduced.

Users need to delete the deployment `longhorn-recovery-backend` manually after rolling back Longhorn

#### Downgrade Longhorn To Any Lower Version

##### Downgrade With `kubectl`

1. Install Longhorn on any Kubernetes cluster by using this command:

    ```shell
    kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/longhorn/longhorn/vx.y.*/deploy/longhorn.yaml
    ```

1. After Longhorn works normally, upgrade Longhorn by using this command:

    ```shell
    kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/longhorn/longhorn/vx.(y-z).*/deploy/longhorn.yaml
    ```

> 1. It will be not allowed and Longhorn will block the downgrade for `longhorn-manager`. [or `longhorn-admission-webhook`, `longhorn-conversion-webhook` and `longhorn-recovery-backend` if downgrading version had these components]

Reviewer: Don't we do the rollback like what we tackle with upgrade failure?

Author: Yes. Added descriptions as the upgrade failed for `kubectl` which needs to do rollback manually

##### Downgrade With `Helm` Or `Rancher App Marketplace`

1. Install Longhorn x.y.* with Helm as [Longhorn Install with Helm document](https://longhorn.io/docs/1.4.1/deploy/install/install-with-helm/) or install Longhorn x.y.* with a Rancher Apps as [Longhorn Install as a Rancher Apps & Marketplace document](https://longhorn.io/docs/1.4.1/deploy/install/install-with-rancher/)
1. Downgrade to Longhorn (x-z).y.* or x.(y-z).* with Helm as [Longhorn Upgrade with Helm document](https://longhorn.io/docs/1.4.1/deploy/upgrade/longhorn-manager/#upgrade-with-helm) or downgrade to Longhorn (x-z).y.* or x.(y-z).* with a Rancher Catalog App as [Longhorn Upgrade as a Rancher Apps & Marketplace document](https://longhorn.io/docs/1.4.1/deploy/upgrade/longhorn-manager/#upgrade-as-a-rancher-catalog-app)

> 1. It will not be allowed and a `pre-upgrade`job of `Helm hook` failed makes the whole helm downgrading process failed.

Reviewer: Don't we do the rollback like what we tackle with upgrade failure?

Author: Added descriptions as the upgrade failed for `Helm` and `Rancher App Marketplace` which are intact and continue serving.

1. Longhorn will be rolled back successfully.

##### Manually Cleanup Example

When users try to upgrade Longhorn from v1.3.x to v1.5.x, a new deployment `longhorn-recovery-backend` will be introduced and the upgrade will fail.
Users need to delete the deployment `longhorn-recovery-backend` manually after rolling back Longhorn

#### Downgrade Longhorn To Any Lower Version

##### Downgrade With `kubectl`

1. Install Longhorn on any Kubernetes cluster by using this command:

    ```shell
    kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/longhorn/longhorn/vx.y.*/deploy/longhorn.yaml
    ```

1. After Longhorn works normally, upgrade Longhorn by using this command:

    ```shell
    kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/longhorn/longhorn/vx.(y-z).*/deploy/longhorn.yaml
    ```

1. It will be not allowed and Longhorn will block the downgrade for `longhorn-manager`. [or `longhorn-admission-webhook`, `longhorn-conversion-webhook` and `longhorn-recovery-backend` if downgrading version had these components]
1. Users need to roll back Longhorn manually to restart `longhorn-manager` pods.

> 

Reviewer: Even need to rollback, but Longhorn is still running without interrupts.
